---
layout: post
title: "Questions Anyone?"
date: 2015-07-15
categories: 
---

A month has passed since my last post on the topic of time management. In the
time inbetween I have reflected on my style of working. By now I have grown
dissatisfied with the process of segmenting the work into single tasks and
tackling them one by one. Even though there is satsifcation in finishing a
number of task in a single day, I often stray from what I initially consider a
task. For example, when I recently wanted to analyze the influence of a set of
parameters on a system, I first had to consider the possible way of generalizing
the results. In the end I did a lot of work, but on the paper I had moved a
single inch forward.

When I made this observation I looked at the literature and considered the Scrum
style of working. To me the approach of horizontally segmenting a system by
means of user stories, which specify the interaction with the system in an
abstract fashion, has great appeal. Unfortunately this concept is much easier
applied to web application than it is to scientific research. Hence I contemplated
what similar abstraction could be perceived for this different arena. It struck
me that the single thing that every research has in common is the original
question. Only by posing questions can we see new possibilities and only when we
are following open questions are we actually doing research.

Formulating questions ("What is the effect of a on b?") instead of tasks
("Observe effect of a on b.") has the advantage that we are from the very
beginning open to unexpected outcomes. Furthermore every question demands an
answer, and you can present every answer. The same is not true for a task, a
task only demands work, but work without an answer will increase the difficulty
of presenting it later on. Now you might ask: "Does this small change in
organization really have an effect of the amount of work you get done?" Well
let's find out. ;)
