---
layout: post
title:  "Story-telling in research"
date:   2018-07-04
categories: meta
---

Currently I am attending a workshop on storytelling. I attented the workshop in
hope of finding a way of better structuring my presentation and in the end my
research. While the workshop has been good so far, I felt that it is a bit
distanced from the life of a researcher. I started to feel disappointed, but
then it dawned me that the trainer has no experience of my field. It is unfair
to expect him to give me ready-made stories for my work. Instead I need 
to transfer the ideas to my domain myself.

Motivated in this way I asked myself: *What are stories in research that make
listening to a talk exciting?* I knew that stories work through identification
of a member of the audience with the presenter.  I, as the audience, see the
presenter's motivations, struggle and accomplishments from her perspective. This
keeps me engaged with her presentation and makes the whole experience memorable.

An attempt of a list of archetypical research stories follow:

<p><center><img src="{{site.baseurl}}/assets/blog/pictures/story1.jpg" style="width:400px" alt="slay the dragon"></center></p>

**Dragon Slayer** The researcher is fascinated with and end and overcomes great challenges to
    reach it

- Example: I want to realize a worker 4.0 that is in sync with the robots
        and machines of current car-making factories.

<p><center><img src="{{site.baseurl}}/assets/blog/pictures/story2.jpg" style="width:400px" alt="astronaut"></center></p>

**Explorer of the unknown** The researcher is curious how far he can push a new technology. He comes to
    what he first perceives as the limit, but pushes on.

- Example: I have recently learned of blockchains and I am curious what 
        performance can be reached with such a blockchain.

<p><center><img src="{{site.baseurl}}/assets/blog/pictures/story3.jpg" style="width:400px" alt="magigician"></center></p>

**Magician** The researcher has developed a new tool and wants to show what new achievments are now in our grasp

- Example: I have developed a new way of testing robot behavior and I show
        the power of the language.

<p><center><img src="{{site.baseurl}}/assets/blog/pictures/story4.jpg" style="width:400px" alt="order"></center></p>

**Herald of order** The researcher struggles to explain the behavior of an
    object and ends up with a theory of predictive power

- Example: I have found a way to explain correlated failures in Cloud-based
        systems and predict a future event.

Now I am not saying that you should throw away the typical structure of a
research talk (Motivation/Problem/Hypothesis, Solution, Evaluation, Conclusion).
On the contrary to adequately describe the stories above, we still need these
structure. However these stories bring the structure too life. And I would
furthermore argue that they are there in the first place, you just have to bring
them to the foreground. Are we in the end not driven by these stories? Did we
not start research, because we got excited to be part of one of these stories?
Sure, there might have been other more mundane reasons, money, comfort,
necessity, etc. Yet what keeps us up against the frustration of the everyday
struggle, I would argue, is this spark of the story we play a role in.
